---
title: "Starting the Chess Journey"
date: 2019-12-21T19:02:14+01:00
draft: true
menu:
  main:
    parent: blog
    name: "starting-the-chess-journey"
---

You can hear chess players saying they've got the chess bug. If you're into
chess, there's a high chance you think you got the same bug. The passion for the
game is hard to explain, the fascination of its logical thinking, its strategic
insights. Not to mention the beauty of a [perfect
information](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_information) game.

When you start playing chess and get the hang of it, soon enough you start
loosing matches and you have idea why. It can become quite frustrating and some
people lose interest. But what if you don't? Where do you start? 

In this blog post, I'm sharing how I'm approaching the study of the game as an
adult with a busy life. I think some contextual information about me as a chess
player may be helpulf. I grew up in a small town north of Napoli. One of my
uncles, a club level chess player, taught me the game when I was twelve or so
and brought me to some tournaments. I remember loving the atmosphere of the
tournamets, all those chessboard lines up on long tables, the ticking of the
clocks. I was into it for a while and then I moved on to other things. I don't
actually remember losing interest in the game. It just happened like many things
in my teens. Then, just a few months ago, I started thinking I needed some quite
hobby. I was about to get a kid and my usual stress relief is a little too loud
(I play all kind of guitars, none of which can be described as quite hobby). I
remebered enjoying chess and gave it a try. The passion for the game hit me very
hard. I discovered a whole new world. Elite tournaments being streamed on
youtube, great websites like [lichess.org](https://lichess.org), and extremly
enjoyable content like [agadmator's Chess
Channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCL5YbN5WLFD8dLIegT5QAbA). I started
playing a lot, mostly blitz and rapid. And, just a couple of months after, I
realized I knew nearly nothing about the game. I wanted to know more, I needed
to.

So, again, where do I start? As I said, and will probably say many more times,
chess is vast, so vast infact it's very easy to get lost and lost interest. So I
did what I always do when I have to learn something difficult: I broke the
problem down. The first breakdown is obviously about stages. The game has an
opening, a middle game, and endgame. Now the question is can I study those three
stages in parallel? The answer to me is of the worst kind: yes and no. Yes,
because of course all phases of the game are important. Equally important I'd
say. No, because everyone (I mean grandmasters of course) would tell you to
start from the endgame. It felt very counterintuitive to me for quite a while.
Then one morning I was walking to the office and connected dots via a pretty
unrelated ruote. I'm into cooking a lot, and [my favourite cooking
book](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/30753841-salt-fat-acid-heat) (if you
want to get better at cooking _anything_, look no further) introduced me to a
beautiful process. If you want to reach a specific goal with a dish, walk it
backward. Picture the final result and apply what you know about cooking to get
there. I believe the concepts applies to chess as well, actually to anything
else. The endgame you play is a consequence of middlegame, and the middlegame
you play is a consequence of the opening you chose. So while it seems very
logical to start studying the game from the opening, it's probably not the best
strategy. For this reason, I decided to ignore books or videos about opening
(some exceptions here. I'll get back to this later) and middlegame so that I can
focus on the fundamentals of the endgame.

Now that I've enstablished the main focus of my studies, it's time to get into
the details. It's obviously a personal decision, but I retain information best
when:

- I read a book
- I write about what I read

Which will result in me publishing a review of the chess books I read. I have a
specific format in mind for those review. Reading is mostly a pleasure for me,
so when I review a book I express my opinion in the form of "I like this, I
don't like that". The chess books  I'm reading are different as I have goals in
mind when I read books. For that reason, I'll always provide the context that
lead me to read a book, and the review will be a description of how close to the
expectations I had for the specific book.

The very first step of this jurney in the land of chess is a sketch of the
[Atlas](/atlas). At the time of writing, it looks like this:

![](/atlas-first-draft.png)

There are a few things to say:

- Yes, it looks pretty ugly. I agree. But I know the Atlas will inevitably
  change as I study so what's the point of trying to make it look great now that
  I know so little about where this website will go?
- Middlegame and strategy are one section. I started with two sections only to
  realise I don't really understand the difference between the two. I feel
  there's not much difference, but my knowledge is very limited. Once again, I
  prefer to show things as they are right now instead of trying to come up with
  the perfect map.
- It's just a list of lists. There's no content yet and the idea is to provide
  it as I go while I study things. I will probably write a blog post for each
  section as they are now. And then expand each section from there.

  Hope you enjoyed it and see you soon!